Hi Daven,

I attach the review file that you emailed me with my responses in red.
Sorry about the red, but you already took up my preferred blue tone in
the early part of the document. Having said that you will notice that in
bouncing around the reviews, and back and forth to the text, I forgot my
(red) convention, and added a couple of comments in blue. These are
actually small pieces of text that I suggest you add in order to respond
to some of the better comments that we got from our reviewers (lines
~1001 and ~1285). The new little text modules that I added at these
lines are actually items that I wanted to put into the original draft,
but did not because of text length considerations. In the context of the
reviewers comments, and having the most current draft to work with, I
feel that these points could now be made with minimal addition to text
length. Have a look, and see what you think.

These reviews are really quite good considering the length and
complexity of our manuscript!

On the line item comments I give you my preferred responses that we use,
including an "X" where I think the reviewer is way off, and do not need
to respond, unless you decide to do so. Simple responses that you can
handle at your discretion are marked as "DQ"

A practice that has worked well for me over the years, and I suggest
that you use is that in responding to reviewer comments you never
surrender the higher ground!

For example, early on in your cover letter note that we appreciate the
detailed work that each reviewer did, and the many excellent minor
suggestions that will improve the manuscript. Also state that we
carefully have considered each comment and in the vast majority of
points that they raise we make the necessary edits.

Also, very important, rather than belabor whether or not the manuscript
is too long and complicated in terms of content. A higher ground
approach to this would be: We feel that G-cubed is the ideal venue for
our paper in that it uses geochemistry, geophysics and numerical
modeling to approach complex problems in integrative geosciences.

Be sure to acknowledge the reviewers efforts.

If all of my responses and new little text modules are OK with you, and
you do not have any major issues to resolve, you can simply make the
changes and return it to the Editor. Be sure to copy it to me, I will be
interested in seeing the final version.

If there are outstanding items to resolve, email to me ASAP, and I will
try to turn them around rapidly in order to get this thing moving down
the publication channel.

Nice work! It has been a pleasure to work with you on this.

jason

