The Pleistocene (1.65 Ma) Crystal Knob volcanic neck in the California Coast
Ranges is an olivine-plagioclase phyric basalt containing dunite and spinel
peridotite xenoliths. Crystal Knob erupted through the Nacimiento belt of the
Franciscan complex and adjacent to crystalline nappes of the "Salinia terrane,"
and its xenoliths sample the mantle lithosphere beneath the outboard exhumed
remnants of the southern California Cretaceous subducting margin. This sample
set augments previous xenolith studies in the Mojave and Sierra Nevada, which
have linked the mantle lithosphere architecture and crustal structure of the
western Cordillera. We examine six peridotite samples ranging from fertile
lherzolites to harzburgite residues. Time-corrected $\epsilon_{\textrm{Nd}}$ of
10.3-11.0 and \ce{^{87}Sr}/\ce{^{86}Sr} of .702 are characteristic of
underplated sub-oceanic mantle. Pyroxene and rare-earth exchange geothermometry
show equilibration at 950-1060 ÂºC. Phase stability, Ca-in-olivine barometry,
and 65-90 mW/m^2 regional geotherms suggest entrainment at 45-75 km depth. The
samples experienced variable partial melting, and re-enrichment of the hottest
samples suggests deep melt interaction. We test the Crystal Knob
temperature-depth array against model geotherms matching several potential
sources for the mantle lithosphere beneath the Coast Ranges: (A) a shallow
Mendocino slab window, (B) a young Monterey-plate "stalled slab", and (C)
Farallon-plate mantle nappes, underplated during the Cretaceous and reheated at
depth by the Miocene slab window. Models B and C fit xenolith thermobarometry,
but Model B is geodynamically untenable. Model C fits both xenolith constraints
and the geologic evolution of southern California. We conclude that the mantle
lithosphere beneath the central California coast was emplaced after Cretaceous
flat-slab subduction and records a thermal signature of Neogene subduction of
the Pacific--Farallon ridge.

