Introduction
============

The tectonic and petrogenetic processes by which Earth’s continental mantle
lithosphere develops through time are of fundamental importance to geodynamics
and Earth history. The architecture of the mantle lithosphere, when integrated
with regional geophysical data and tectonic and petrogenetic studies of the
overlying crust, offers critical insights into the geodynamic processes of
continental assembly. Mantle xenoliths entrained in volcanic rock reveal
compositions and textures of the deep lithosphere in a vertical transect below
the eruptive event, and petrogenetic studies of xenolith suites can discern
their thermal conditions, depth of entrainment, and geochemical evolution. In
this contribution, we present new petrologic and geochemical data on mantle
xenoliths hosted in the Pleistocene Crystal Knob volcanic neck in coastal
central California. We integrate these findings both with regional
geophysical and modeling studies of the mantle lithosphere and a well-developed
literature on the tectonic and petrogenetic development of the overlying
crust.

The Crystal Knob xenolith locality samples a crucially important lithospheric
column through the Late Cretaceous convergent margin of the North American
Cordillera. This regionally extensive belt includes a voluminous
continental magmatic arc, generated as the Farallon oceanic plate
subducted eastward beneath western North America [e.g. @Glazner1991;
@Ducea2015], and the Franciscan complex, the crustal-level accretionary complex
of this subduction zone. The Franciscan includes tectonic slivers of Farallon
plate oceanic basement and pelagic sediment, as well as upper plate
siliciclastic sediments derived from the magmatic arc [@Cowan1978;
@Murchey1984; @Sliter1984; @Blake1988; @Chapman2016; @Chapman2016a]. The
crystalline basement blocks of the "Salinian terrane", or "Salinia"
[@Page1981], have recently been recognized as a series of nappes derived from
the southern California segment of the Late Cretaceous magmatic arc, displaced
westward to lie tectonically above the accretionary complex near the central
California coast [@Hall1991; @Barth2003; @Kidder2006; @Ducea2009; @Chapman2012;
@Hall2013]. The Crystal Knob xenolith locality lies along the western margin of
Salinia, adjacent to the Nacimiento fault [@fig:context], a polyphase shear
zone which, in its original geometry, constituted the local structural base of
the Salinian crystalline nappe sequence [@Hall2013]. In this setting, the
Crystal Knob xenolith suite samples the uppermost mantle that has been
constructed beneath both the Franciscan accretionary complex and its local
veneer of Salinia crystalline nappes.

## Regional tectonic setting

The tectonic setting of the sub-Crystal Knob mantle lithosphere is best
understood by restoring its host crustal rocks to their position prior to San
Andreas transform offset. This places them outboard of the southern California
batholith, the southern continuation of the Sierra Nevada batholith across the
Garlock fault [@fig:context]. In this restored position, the crystalline nappes
that constitute Salinia correlate to deeply exhumed Cretaceous arc plutonic
rocks of the southernmost Sierra Nevada batholith and the northwestern zones of
the southern California batholith, the latter widely exposed in the Mojave
plateau [@Wood1997; @Saleeby2003; @Barbeau2005; @Chapman2012]. The central and
northern regions of the batholith are currently exposed at shallow to medial
crustal depths (2 to 4 kb pressure), whereas at its southern reaches,
a continuous gradient to deep  levels (10 kb) is exposed [@Ague1988a;
@Nadin2008].

These deeply exhumed batholithic rocks form the regional upper plate above
a polyphase low-angle fault system, interpreted as the extensionally
remobilized shallow subduction megathrust. Below this tectonic surface,
Franciscan-affinity, mainly metaclastic rocks were tectonically underplated in
the Late Cretaceous [@Malin1995; @Barth2003; @Saleeby2003; @Yan2005;
@Ducea2009; @Chapman2010; @Chapman2012; @Chapman2016b]. These subduction
channel schists are exposed in a series of tectonic windows [@fig:context] and
tectonically encase blocks and nappes of Farallon-plate oceanic basement and
sediments. The schist protoliths were derived from the upper plate batholithic
belt, which was rapidly exhumed above a shallow flat segment of the Franciscan
subduction megathrust system [@Barth2003; @Saleeby2007; @Chapman2013;
@Chapman2016a]. Shallow tectonic underplating of subduction-channel schists
directly beneath lower-crustal batholithic rocks requires the prior tectonic
erosion of the underlying mantle wedge lithosphere and parts of the deepest arc
crust south of this transition zone at the southern Sierras. Seismic reflection
imaging shows an effectively flat megathrust beneath the western Mojave plateau
[@Yan2005] and dips of ~30ºN beneath the southernmost Sierra Nevada region
[@Malin1995]. This inflection in the megathrust corresponds to the most-exhumed
batholithic rocks of the southern Sierra Nevada and is interpreted as a lateral
ramp towards a "flat slab" beneath the Mojave province and dispersed southern
California batholith [@Saleeby2003; @Chapman2016b]. The Garlock fault
[@fig:context] nucleated along this inflection during the early Miocene
[@Saleeby2016].

The southern California "flat slab" is attributed to the ephemeral buoyancy
resulting from the subduction of the conjugate massif to the Shatsky Rise
oceanic igneous province [@Livaccari1981; @Sliter1984; @Saleeby2003], which is
currently resolved in deep seismic tomographic images beneath the interior of
North America [@Liu2010; @Sun2017]. The Salinia nappes and adjacent (restored
for Neogene dextral faulting) deeply exhumed batholithic rocks were displaced
and structurally attenuated by both the shallow subduction megathrust and
subsequent trench-directed extensional faulting, which occurred as the Shatsky
conjugate moved deeper into the mantle beneath the North American plate
[@Saleeby2003; @Liu2010; @Chapman2012].

In the Neogene, ridge subduction and the opening of the Pacific-Farallon slab
window [@Atwater1998] drove far-field effects including late Cenozoic regional
volcanism in central and southern California [@Dodge1988] and the convective
ascent of asthenosphere in the southern Basin and Range province
[@LePourhiet2006]. Beginning in the Miocene, crustal blocks hosting Crystal
Knob were moved northwest along the San Andreas transform system to their
present position [e.g. @Argus1991; @Wilson2005].

# Previous mantle xenolith studies

The southwest North American Cordillera hosts many xenolith localities, at
which upper mantle and lower crustal rock fragments were entrained in mainly
late Cenozoic volcanic eruptions. Early studies of a number of these xenolith
suites catalogued petrographic features and classified samples into textural
groups [e.g. @Nixon1987; @Wilshire1988]. Subsequently, modern geochemical and
petrogenetic techniques have revealed several regional mantle lithosphere
domains: Precambrian crustal root, Cretaceous arc mantle wedge, underplated
Farallon plate nappes, and late Cenozoic shallow convective asthenosphere [e.g.
@Galer1989; @Livaccari1993; @Alibert1994; @Beard1995; @Ducea1998a; @Jove1998;
@Lee2001; @Usui2003; @Luffi2009].

The modification of the mantle lithosphere by the Cretaceous "flat slab" is
recorded by integrated mantle xenolith and deep-lithosphere seismic studies.
The central Sierra Nevada xenolith suite [@fig:context] was entrained in late
Miocene small-volume volcanic flows and plugs. It samples the intact Sierra
Nevada batholithic root and corresponding Cretaceous mantle wedge [@Ducea1996;
@Ducea1998a; @Lee2001; @Saleeby2003; @Lee2006; @Chin2015]. In contrast,
xenoliths recovered from the eastern margin of the Mojave province record the
partial tectonic erosion of sub-continental mantle lithosphere (including
Cretaceous mantle wedge) and the underplating of Farallon plate mantle
lithosphere [@Shervais1973; @Luffi2009; @Armytage2015; @Shields2016GSA]. The
Dish Hill suite [@fig:context] samples an upper mantle duplex with imbricated
nappes of Farallon-plate oceanic mantle lying in structural sequence beneath
a relatively thin roof of attenuated continental lithosphere peridotites. The
mantle duplex is interpreted to have formed during the episode that dispersed
the overlying southern California batholith,  as the Farallon plate retreated
following low-angle subduction of the Shatsky conjugate [@Luffi2009].

Xenoliths of the eastern Sierra suite [@fig:context] record Neogene
asthenospheric upwelling. These occur in Pliocene-Quaternary mafic lava flows
and record significantly steeper thermal gradients and more fertile
compositions than the Cretaceous mantle wedge suite from the central Sierra
[@Ducea1996; @Ducea1998b]. Seismic data shows asthenospheric mantle extending
to the base of the crust (~30 km depth) in the eastern Sierra [@Jones1998;
@Zandt2004; @Frassetto2011; @Jones2014]: this mantle domain is the likely
source for the eastern Sierra xenoliths. The eruption of xenolith-hosting lavas
of eastern Sierra suite within the <5 Ma Owens Valley rift system
[@fig:context] was likely driven by upper mantle convection [@LePourhiet2006;
@Jones2014].

These studies suggest a clear correspondence between xenolith-sampled upper
mantle domains and surface geology. Sub-continental suites are generally
erupted through cratonic and peri-cratonic crust, mantle wedge suites through
the Cretaceous large-volume batholith, and asthenospheric suites through active
rifts. Xenolith suites derived from underplated Farallon plate mantle nappes
have thus far only been recovered from more inboard crustal domains, requiring
large sub-horizontal displacements and underplating along relatively shallow
subduction megathrust systems [@Helmstaedt1975; @Lee2001b].

Crystal Knob presents a rare opportunity to sample mantle lithosphere directly
beneath a region of long-lived subduction accretion proximal to the plate edge.
The reconstructed position of Crystal Knob, directly outboard of the Dish Hill
locality [@fig:context], as well as its penetration of the Franciscan
accretionary complex, suggests that its xenoliths may sample additional
underplated Farallon mantle nappes outboard of the Dish Hill mantle duplex.
However, its restored position above the Pacific-Farallon slab window
[@Wilson2005] suggests that the upper mantle underpinnings of Crystal Knob may
have originated as ascended asthenosphere, in a manner analogous to the eastern
Sierra xenolith suite.

In this integrative study, we investigate the petrology and geochemistry of the
Crystal Knob xenolith suite and model the evolution of the mantle lithosphere
beneath the California Coast Ranges. Building context from previous xenolith
and geophysical studies, we explore the relative role of Cretaceous and Neogene
processes in building the deep lithosphere beneath the western margin of North
America.

<!--[[context]]-->
<!--[[field_photo]]-->

