
<!--[[minerals]]-->
<!--[[lava_minerals]]--
<!--[[major_elements]]-->

## Peridotite xenoliths {#sec:xenoliths}

<!--[[textures]]-->

<!--[[sample_petrography]]-->
<!--[[microscope-images]]-->

The peridotite samples (CK-2 through CK-7) are texturally classified using
the scheme of @Pike1977. All samples display an allotriomorphic granular
texture with anisotropy largely absent. Minor plastic deformation features
are petrographically observed in most samples, including slight kink
bands in some olivines. However, the parallel nature of the domain
boundaries and minor (~1º) angular offsets of crystal axes
in most cases indicates that these were not formed under
significant strain.
Samples CK-2 and CK-5 exhibit a weak shape-preferred alignment in elongate
spinels [@fig:textures].

Minor late-stage alteration products are seen in all peridotite samples.
These include variably Fe-rich grain boundaries of major phases and Ti
enrichment in pyroxene rims (<10 µm from the grain
  edge). Sample CK-4 contains an alteration channel that cuts linearly
across the thin section. This channel is bounded by resorbed boundaries
of the major phases (olivine and orthopyroxene) and hosts
microcrystalline clinopyroxene, 10 µm-scale euhedral spinels,
and minor amphibole. Near this melt channel, thin streamers of
intergranular fill show compositions enriched in Na and Ti. These
fills are present (but less extensive) in sample CK-3, and
generally absent in other samples. Samples other than CK-3 and CK-4
largely do not show melt infiltration along grain boundaries, instead
having major phases in contact (though many grain boundaries are fractured).
Clinopyroxene grains in all samples, but most notably CK-3 and CK-4,
are strongly intergrown with orthopyroxene.
Sample CK-7 shows minor exsolution lamellae of
orthopyroxene and clinopyroxene. Peridotite fragments in CK-D1 show
abundant exsolution lamellae [@fig:microscope_images|c].

Sample CK-6, the most fertile in the sample set, shows abundant
pyroxene exsolution manifesting as small-scale vermicular texture.
Fused pyroxenes with substantially different axial
directions within the same crystal indicate recrystallization and
aggregation. These features are seen only in CK-6.

### Compositions of dominant phases

Major-element abundances for the peridotite xenoliths were measured
by electron microprobe using methods discussed in @sec:methods. Results
are summarized in @tbl:composition|a and @fig:major_elements. Generally, phase compositions
show tight per-sample groupings, which suggest equilibrium within
each sample.  The major silicate phases show Mg# > 87, consistent with
fertile or residual mantle compositions. Variations in Mg\#
between samples indicate differences in melt-extraction and
refertilization history between the samples.

Silicate phases within CK-3 and CK-4 have high Mg\#
that suggest a residual composition, while the other
samples are more fertile.
Samples CK-2, CK-5, and CK-7 cluster tightly in Fe-Mg space, with
relatively low Mg\#s indicative of fertile compositions.
Sample CK-6 has low Mg\#s for all major phases, with values
as low as 87 for clinopyroxenes.

Spinel compositions give slightly more information on the modes of variation
between samples. For accuracy, we correct spinel Mg\# from total iron to
ferrous iron basis using charge balance on a 4-oxygen basis. This correction results
in spinel Mg\# between 75 and 81, slightly higher than the uncorrected value.
Results are shown in @tbl:spinel_correction and @fig:spinel_cr.
<fixme>Don't show uncorrected data in @fig:spinel_cr.</fixme>
Some samples, particularly CK-2, have scatter in corrected Mg# due to
lack of accounting for unmeasured transition metals (e.g. Zn, Co, V)
that are common in oxide minerals.
CK-3 and CK-4 show high Cr\#
(molar Cr/(Cr+Al) $\cdot{}$ 100) indicative
of melt extraction, while the fertile samples show low Cr\#s. Sample CK-6 has an
intermediate spinel Cr\# that is possibly a vestige of initial
depletion, indicating incomplete
re-equilibration upon refertilization [@fig:major_elements|a].

<comment>
Need to reformulate to emphasize:
- CK-6 is an outlier
- Fertile composition seems to be gained by refertilization
- Both initial residue and refertilizing agent were likely rather evolved, given high-iron composition of mineral components.
</comment>
<comment>
From Peter: sample CK-6 is clearly anomalous because it's lowest Mg# in ol and px
doesn't fit with the intermediary Cr# in spl. I'd take this as
indication of incomplete re-equilibration upon refertilization. That is,
the relatively high Cr# in spl might be a pre-refertilization
vestige.</comment>

The phase compositions of the "fertile" samples are quite consistent,
as are those of CK-3 and CK-4 (the more depleted samples). CK-6, with
silicate-phase signatures of enrichment combined with high-iron
compositions and chromian spinels, potentially demonstrates depletion
during partial melting followed by assimilation of a higher-iron enriching component.

### Modal mineralogy
<!--[[modes]]-->

The peridotite samples are lithologically classified using
recalculated whole-rock mineral modes.
Mineralogy was classified on a ~5000 pixel grid atop
coregistered optical scans and electron
backscatter mosaics [@fig:textures]. Volumetric modes were converted
to %wt using representative densities for spinel-facies
peridotite phases [@Nesse2000]. Results are shown in
@tbl:modal_mineralogy and @fig:modes.

The samples range from lherzolites to clinopyroxene
harzburgites and are dominated by olivine and orthopyroxene. All samples
contain minor (<1%wt) spinel. CK-2 has the most fertile
composition, with 12.2%wt clinopyroxene. CK-3 is the least
fertile sample, with 0.91%wt clinopyroxene. Weight percents derived from
olivine modes range from 65 to 75%. Grain size varies between samples but
generally has a characteristic scale of 200 µm. Some larger crystals are
evident -- the
harzburgite CK-3 contains 2 mm orthopyroxene
porphyroblasts. All samples are Type I peridotites in the @Frey1978
classification system.

<comment>it would be suitable to comment here or later on the degree to
which mineral chemistry and mineral modes are correlated, and whether
CK-6 is an outlier from said correlations.</comment>

### Whole-rock composition

Whole-rock major-element abundances are
reconstructed from averaged mineral composition and estimated modes.
Representative mineral compositions are given in @tbl:composition|a, and
recalculated whole-rock compositions in @tbl:composition|c.
Whole-rock Mg\# ranges from 87 to 91. Within each
sample, a consistent Mg\# for all silicate phases [@fig:major_elements] is indicative of Fe-Mg
equilibrium. All samples contain <1%wt spinel, with Mg\#
variation mirroring that of the silicate phases. A range of
spinel Cr\# from 10 to 27
implies variation in degree of partial melting between samples, with
higher-Cr spinels in residues of higher-degree melting [@Dick1984]. We
explore this further in @sec:depletion-model.

Samples CK-2, CK-5, and CK-7 have Mg# between 89 and 90 (both for individual
silicate phases and reconstructed whole-rock measurements). CK-3 and
CK-4 have higher Mg#, with whole-rock Mg# greater than 90. CK-6 has a
whole-rock Mg# < 88 and contains substantially
more Cr and Al than the other samples. Though CK-6 is generally the most
enriched in incompatible elements, sample CK-2 contains
substantially more Ca and Na.

The coincident low Mg# and spinel Cr# of CK-2, CK-5, and CK-7 implies that they are
relatively fertile peridotites, with low apparent melt volumes extracted
(net of possible refertilization).
The variation in whole-rock composition within these samples is due to a
change in the abundance of pyroxene phases, with sample CK-2 containing
substantially more pyroxene than CK-5.
The higher Mg# of samples CK-3 and CK-4 corresponds to their status as
residues of high-degree partial melting, which is also evident from
their classification as harzburgites. For sample CK-6, the combination
of high spinel Cr#
(implying depletion by partial melting) and low Mg# (a marker of
major-element fertility) suggests that this sample experienced a
multistage history of depletion and re-enrichment in major elements.
Assimilation of a more evolved melt might explain its higher iron
content and pyroxene modes, with excess pyroxene forming due to
the addition of silica to an olivine-rich residual assemblage.

<!--[[whole_rock_major]]-->

<!--[[spinel_cr]]-->

<!--[[cpx_profile]]-->

<!--[[trace_elements_table]]-->
<!--[[spinel_correction]]-->

