## Trace Elements

<!-- ## Methods  -->
Trace element concentrations were acquired for pyroxene grains
in each xenolith sample,
using a Cameca IMS-7f-GEO magnetic-sector secondary ion mass
spectrometer (SIMS) at the California Institute of Technology. Two to
three each of orthopyroxene and clinopyroxene grains were targeted per
xenolith sample. Measurements were acquired with 9 kV beam flux and a
100 µm spot size. The USGS glass standard NIST 610 was used as an
external standard for all elements [@Gao2002]<!-- this ref is for
LA-ICP-MS -->. Minimal variation in measured concentration was observed
at grain and sample scale, though clinopyroxene in CK-6 and
orthopyroxene in CK-7 show differences outside of analytical error in
Ba, La, and Ce (potentially attributable to concentrations near SIMS
detection limits). Other measurements are largely concordant and results
are presented as within-sample averages. Whole-rock trace element
abundances are estimated using measured concentrations in clinopyroxene
and orthopyroxene and mineral modes. Olivine is ignored in calculations
because rare-earth elements (REEs) are 2-3 orders of magnitude less
compatible than in clinopyroxene [@WittEickschen2005;@Luffi2009].
Results for measured pyroxene and recalculated whole-rock trace elements
are shown in `Table trace_elements`.

<!--[[spider]]-->

Clinopyroxene, orthopyroxene, and recalculated whole-rock rare-earth element show several modes of
variation between samples, corresponding to different amounts of
depletion and re-enrichment.
All samples show clear evidence of rare-earth element
depletion, although the amount of this depletion varies.
The cooler samples show progressive depletion in light rare-earth
elements (LREEs) and undepleted heavy rare-earths (HREEs). The warmer
samples show progressive HREE depletion and enrichment in LREEs. These
trends are inverted, so CK-4, the most HREE-depleted sample, is also the
most LREE-enriched.

<!-- Maybe this paragraph should go lower? --> This pattern suggests
that the cooler samples were depleted of (relatively more incompatible)
LREEs as residues of progressive fractional melting [@Johnson1990].
The warmer group of samples underwent a multistage history of
wholesale REE depletion (due to higher-degree melting) followed by later
LREE re-enrichment. This overprinting relationship is similar to that
observed in mid-ocean ridge peridotites, with ridge crest depletion
followed by off axis refertilization via infiltration of low-melt
fraction magmas [@Luffi2009]. However, this relationship may also have
arisen during melt extraction and entrainment prior <!--(confusing, do
you mean during eruption/entrainment here?)--> to eruption. The latter
seems to demand a significant residence time of the hotter xenoliths in,
or proximal to, a magma chamber at depth to allow LREE
refertilization.
