## Rb-Sr and Sm-Nd isotopes

Portions of each spinel peridotite sample were crushed using a disk mill at the
California Institute of Technology. Clinopyroxene grains (150--300 Âµm, 35-45 mg
per sample and free of visible inclusions and alteration) were picked by hand
under a binocular microscope. These clinopyroxene separates were analyzed for
strontium and neodymium isotopes at the University of Arizona, Tuscon following
the procedures described in @Otamendi2009 and @Drew2009. The samples were
spiked with mixed $^{147}$Sm-$^{150}$Nd tracers [@Wasserburg1981; @Ducea1998a].
Rb was measured on a quadrupole ICP-MS, while Sr was measured in static
multicollector mode on a VG 54 instrument. Sm was analyzed using a static
routine on a  VG Sector 54 multicollector thermal-ionization mass spectrometer,
and Nd was measured as an oxide on a multicollector VG 354 instrument. Results
are presented in @tbl:isotopes_table.

<!--[[[fig:isotopes]]]-->

All samples are enriched in radiogenic \ce{^{143}Nd} (time-corrected
$\epsilon_{\textrm{Nd}}$ from 10.3 to 11.0) and depleted in \ce{^{87}Sr}
(time-corrected \ce{^{87}Sr}/\ce{^{86}Sr} of .702). These values are well below
those of 0.708 recorded by Salinian granites [e.g. @Kistler2001], suggesting
that the mantle lithosphere sampled by Crystal Knob is sourced from a different
mantle reservoir than the overlying crust of the central California coast. More
broadly, this pattern of strong depletion in large-ion-lithophile elements is
characteristic of the depleted convecting mantle. This signature rules out an
origin in the sub-cratonic mantle lithosphere or Mesozoic mantle wedge beneath
western North America [@Ducea1998b; @Wilshire1988; @Luffi2009] and suggests
an origin in the asthenospheric or underplated oceanic mantle
[@DePaolo1976b;@McCulloch1978].

<!--[[[tbl:isotopes_table]]]-->

