## Rb-Sr and Sm-Nd isotopes

<!--## Isotopes-->
Portions of each peridotite sample were crushed using
a disk mill at the California Institute of Technology. Clinopyroxene
grains (150--300 µm, 35-45 mg per sample and free of visible
inclusions and alteration) were picked by hand under a binocular
microscope. These clinopyroxene separates were analyzed for strontium
and neodymium isotopes at the University of Arizona, Tuscon
following the procedures described in @Otamendi2009 and @Drew2009. The samples were
spiked with mixed $^{147}$Sm-$^{150}$Nd tracers [@Wasserburg1981; @Ducea1998].
Rb was measured on a quadrupole ICP-MS, while Sr was measured in static
multicollector mode on a VG 54 instrument. Sm was analyzed using a
static routine on a  VG Sector 54 multicollector thermal-ionization mass
spectrometer, and Nd was measured as an oxide on a multicollector VG 354
instrument. Results are presented in @tbl:isotopes_table.

<!--[[isotopes]]-->

Rb-Sr and Sm-Nd radiogenic isotope data for clinopyroxene separates show
these samples to be derived from the depleted convecting mantle.
All xenolith samples are enriched in radiogenic \ce{^{143}Nd}
($\epsilon_{\textrm{Nd}}$ from 10.3 to 11.0) and depleted in
\ce{^{87}Sr} (\ce{^{87}Sr}/\ce{^{86}Sr} of .702).
With respect to the central California
coast, values here are well below those of 0.708 recorded by Salinian
granites [e.g. @Kistler2001], suggesting that the mantle lithosphere
sampled by Crystal Knob is sourced from a different mantle reservoir
than the overlying crust.
More broadly, this pattern of strong
depletion in large-ion-lithophile elements rules out an origin in the
western North America mantle lithosphere or the
Mesozoic mantle wedge beneath western North America [@Ducea1998b; @Wilshire1988; @Luffi2009]
and suggests an origin in the asthenospheric or underplated oceanic mantle
[@DePaolo1976b;@McCulloch1978].

<!--[[isotopes_table]]-->

