## Trace Elements

Trace element concentrations were acquired for pyroxene grains
in each xenolith sample,
using a Cameca IMS-7f-GEO magnetic-sector secondary ion mass
spectrometer (SIMS) at the California Institute of Technology. Two to
three each of orthopyroxene and clinopyroxene grains were targeted per
xenolith sample. Measurements were acquired with 9 kV beam flux and a
100 µm spot size. The USGS glass standard NIST 610 was used as an
external standard for all elements [@Gao2002].
Minimal variation in measured concentration was observed
at grain and sample scale, though clinopyroxene in CK-6 and
orthopyroxene in CK-7 show differences outside of analytical error in
Ba, La, and Ce (potentially attributable to concentrations near SIMS
detection limits). Other measurements are largely concordant and results
are presented as within-sample averages. Whole-rock trace element
abundances are estimated using measured concentrations in clinopyroxene
and orthopyroxene and mineral modes. Olivine is excluded from
calculations, which is of minimal impact as
rare-earth elements (REEs) are 2-3 orders of magnitude less
compatible than in clinopyroxene [@WittEickschen2005;@Luffi2009].
Results for measured pyroxene and recalculated whole-rock trace elements
are shown in @tbl:trace_elements_table. Graphical results for pyroxene REEs
are shown in @fig:trace_elements, and recalculated whole-rock
concentrations are shown in @fig:ree_model.

<!--[[trace_elements]]-->

Clinopyroxene, orthopyroxene, and recalculated whole-rock rare-earth
elements show several types of
variation between samples, corresponding to different amounts of
depletion and re-enrichment.
All samples show clear evidence of rare-earth element
depletion relative to depleted MORB mantle.
For clinopyroxenes, the samples show a range of depletion in rare-earth
elements following patterns seen in abyssal peridotites in HREE, with
variably elevated LREE content presumably due to re-enrichment in the presence
of more evolved melt [@fig:trace_elements].

### Modeling depletion and re-enrichment {#sec:depletion-model}

Clinopyroxene REE patterns tell only part of the story of whole-rock
depletion and re-enrichment.
Since modal pyroxene abundances have changed significantly in response to
depletion, recalculated whole-rock trace elements are a valuable tool
to assess the overall level of depletion in the sample.
Sample CK-5 in particular is much more depleted in whole-rock
composition than its clinopyroxene trace-element composition would suggest, due to
low clinopyroxene modes.

We construct a melt-partitioning model to
determine the depletion and re-enrichment history of the Crystal Knob
sample set and distinguish between potential
enriching agents [@fig:ree_model|a].
A generic model of peridotite depletion is constructed
in *alphaMELTS* [@Smith2005b], in which
a parcel of material starting at a mantle
potential temperature of 1350ºC at 3.0 GPa
and a depleted MORB mantle composition [@Workman2005] is
tracked along an isentropic fractional melting path
with a melt porosity of 1%, using the pMELTS family of algorithms. Trace-element partitioning
coefficients from @Lee2007 are used to track these components,
and we confirm that garnet is removed from the evolving system at ~2.0 GPa.
These starting parameters were chosen to provide the best correspondence
with the overall experimental dataset. A wide range of initial
conditions (up to 1500ºC at 3.0 GPa) provide similar results
for the shape of depleted trace-element profiles, though these results
do not map to unique temperatures.

In the first model step, the Crystal Knob xenolith samples are fit
to model steps along this adiabatic path using minimization of the
squared deviations of measured values from model HREE (Er--Lu)
compositions. HREE concentrations can reasonably be assumed to be
a proxy for depletion, since HREEs are highly compatible and have
low diffusion rates, and are not easily modified by late re-enrichment.
Thus, the best-fitting decompression step gives an model composition
for the samples after single-stage depletion. The measured
composition of sample CK-2 matches this modeled composition
across the REEs, while other samples have much higher LREE
concentrations than is reasonable for residues of decompression melting.

For the depleted samples (all except CK-2), a second step is taken to
find the trace-element pattern of a potential enriching agent.
The fitted depleted profile is subtracted from the sample composition,
and excess measured LREE is interpreted
as the contribution from batch addition of an enriching melt.
To compare against various potential enriching agents, the model is
normalized to an average HREE of
6$\times$primitive mantle, a typical HREE concentration for both
normal MORB [@Sun1989] and alkali basalt [@Farmer1995].
The slope of the resulting normalized profile is diagnostic
of the relative abundance of trace elements in the re-enriching agent.
The normalization factor employed to shift the composition of enriching
fluids to this value is shown in @fig:ree_model|b and is proportional to
the relative amount of material added during re-enrichment (assuming a consistent
composition).

The results of this model confirm that all samples except CK-2 are variably depleted
and re-enriched to some extent, while CK-2 shows neither depletion nor
re-enrichment [@fig:ree_model].
The re-enriched samples have assimilated varying amounts of an enriching
agent with a trace-element pattern similar to alkali basalt. The
pronounced LREE enrichment of samples CK-3 and CK-4 is due to
the lack of REE and low pyroxene modes in the sample, so assimilation of
small masses of enriching melt can greatly increase normalized
abundances.
It is likely that all samples experienced a small (<1% assimilation) interaction with a
fractionated basaltic melt [@fig:ree_model|b]. However, if HREEs have been substantially
enriched (as seems to be the case for sample CK-6) excess LREE is a minimum
constraint on re-enrichment.

Primary depletion degrees of the xenolith samples are estimated by finding
the pMELTS model compositions that best fit the whole-rock HREE, MgO, and
\ce{Al2O3} composition of each sample. Results are summarized
in @tbl:depletion_degrees and show trends superficially similar to
those visible in modal abundance [@fig:modes] and trace element
[@fig:trace_elements] data. The degree of depletion generally increases
with the modeled temperature of the sample, with the notable exception of
sample CK-6, which is by far the least-depleted sample by major-element
proxies and only moderately depleted in heavy rare-earth elements,
although it has the hottest modeled temperature.

<!--[[ree_model]]-->
<!--[[ree_trends]]-->

<!--[[depletion_degrees]]-->

### Discussion of trace elements

The trace element dataset developed here suggests that
the samples were variably depleted of REEs following
progressive fractional melting [@Johnson1990].
All of the samples underwent
wholesale REE depletion (due to higher-degree melting) followed by later
LREE re-enrichment. Our modeling suggests a similar degree of LREE
re-enrichment for all samples, with less than 1% melt assimilation in all cases
(assuming a somewhat HREE-enriched melt similar to MORB or alkali basalt).
However, the more depleted samples having the lowest clinopyroxene modes show
pronounced re-enrichment in clinopyroxene REEs, which likely arises from the
preferential assimilation of rare-earths into clinopyroxene. Still the patterns
of re-enrichment found in these samples are not found in abyssal peridotites
[@Warren2016], suggesting that this pattern arose from secondary re-enrichment
by LREE-rich material at depth.

The overall trace element pattern suggests that the xenolith samples are
residues of progressive fractional melting of primitive mantle at the
mid-ocean ridge, a single-stage process similar to that recorded in
abyssal peridotites [@Johnson1990; @Warren2016].
The samples underwent
a multistage history of REE depletion followed by later LREE re-enrichment by an enriched melt.
Trace element patterns suggest that the Crystal Knob samples record
a range of fertility, with sample CK-2 essentially undepleted.
The alignment of HREE fertility with patterns expressed in phase composition and modal abundance
suggests that HREE depletion is primary, without significant re-enrichment.
All samples show evidence of a distinct but volumetrically minor assimilation
of LREE-enriched melt.
Sample CK-6 is an exception to this alignment, with high LREEs in excess of those
formed at any stage of fractional melting. This, along with anomalous phase
compositions, suggests that this sample assimilated a significant amount of more-evolved
melt, and its trace-element profile (including HREE composition) is
formed by refertilization.

