## Major-element thermometry

Electron-microprobe major-element data is used as the basis for pyroxene
Ca--exchange geothermometry. Several complimentary formulations are used: BKN
[@Brey1990] and TA98 [@Taylor1998] are two slightly different formulations
based on empirical calibration of the two-pyroxene Ca exchange reaction in
simple and natural systems. @Taylor1998 is explicitly calibrated to account for
errors arising from high Na content. The Ca-in-orthopyroxene
thermometer [@Brey1990] is formulated for use in the absence of clinopyroxene.
Results are shown in @tbl:thermometry and
@fig:temp_comparisons.

<!--[[[tbl:thermometry]]]-->

<!--[[[fig:temp_comparisons]]]-->

Core and rim compositions are separated to assess within-sample
temperature disequilibrium and late-stage (e.g. eruptive) heating. Analytical errors (caused by
uncertainty in microprobe data) are small, on the order of 5ºC (1$\sigma$).
Other sources of error include the calibration of the thermometer
and potential bias from within-sample disequilibrium. @Taylor1998
reports residuals of calibration of the thermometer to experimental
data which yield total errors of 50-60ºC (1$\sigma$). Unreported calibration errors for the
BKN and Ca-OPX thermometers are likely similar in scale [@Taylor1998]. In practice,
error distributions based on calibration with heterogeneous experimental
samples likely form an upper bound on relative errors.

Within-sample variation in temperatures is a proxy for the relative
error of recovered temperatures. Measured pyroxene compositions
are grouped by location, and separate
temperatures are calculated for each nearest-neighbor pair of
orthopyroxene and clinopyroxene. Analytical errors are propagated through the
calculation. The resulting distribution of temperatures for grain cores and
rims for each sample (with *n* ranging from 19 to 74 pairs per group)
accounts for within-sample variation and provides an approximation of
measurement precision.

### Thermometer results

Average TA98 temperatures range from 957 to 1063ºC for cores and 955 to
1054ºC for rims [@tbl:thermometry]. CK-2 core temperatures indicate more
complete equilibration, with a standard deviation of only 2.3ºC
(compared with 8.2-12.4ºC for all other samples). Core temperatures for
individual grain pairs are distributed roughly normally,
and the clustering of temperatures in a ~25-50ºC range for each sample
suggests that the aggregated measurements model equilibrium
temperatures at this level of accuracy.
Outlying core temperatures in samples CK-4 and CK-6 may
indicate two-pyroxene major element disequilibrium at millimeter scale.
In CK-4, a few core TA98 temperatures of 1100ºC are likely related to
late-stage diffusion during entrainment and eruption.

Rim temperatures (measured ~10 µm from grain edges) are generally higher
than core temperatures, although the level of disparity varies widely
between samples. CK-2 shows only modestly elevated rim temperatures,
while CK-3 and CK-6 show significant scatter to temperatures ~180ºC
higher than grain cores (CK-5 and CK-7 contain a few measurements of
this type as well). High and variable rim compositions may be related to
melt infiltration during entrainment and eruption, but with significant
mobilization of cations limited to grain rims. CK-4, which shows high
core temperatures and the most significant petrographic evidence of melt
infiltration, lacks high-temperature rim compositions, suggesting
equilibration at high temperature, possibly in the Crystal Knob melt.

### Discussion of two-pyroxene thermometry

Different two-pyroxene thermometers produce similar results, suggesting
that temperature measurements are robust estimates of sample equilibrium
temperatures [@fig:temp_comparisons].
The Ca-in-OPX thermometer shares its calibration with
BKN [@Brey1990] and sensibly yields coincident results. The low
within-sample scatter of Ca-in-OPX temperatures likely results from
fast diffusion and re-equilibration of small amounts of Ca in
orthopyroxene. TA98 and BKN temperatures have a strong linear
relationship, with BKN temperature estimates higher by up to 50ºC. This
relationship mirrors the findings of @Nimis2010 and
can be expressed as $T_{\mathrm{BKN}} = 0.9 T_{\mathrm{TA98}}
+ 145$ [ºC].
@Nimis2010 advises the preferred use of TA98 based on
experimental validation. Given the largely predictable results of
two-pyroxene thermometers, we accept their preference for further analysis.

The samples can be divided into two cohorts based on equilibration temperature.
A cooler group (samples CK-2, CK-5, and CK-7) has grain core temperatures
clustered at ~970ºC (TA98). A hotter group (samples CK-3, CK-4, and CK-6) has
a mean temperature of ~1050ºC (TA98). The division between these two groups is
robust, apparent in all thermometers, and aligned with geochemical differences
within the sample set. The hotter samples have higher spinel Cr\# and greater
HREE depletion, and the range of temperatures likely records the sourcing of
two sets of xenoliths from different depths within a magmatic ascent system.
Throughout this paper, the samples are color-coded, with blue-green
corresponding to the low-temperature array, and red-yellow representing the
high-temperature samples \[@fig:major_elements‌-‌-@fig:depth\].

## REE-in-pyroxene thermometry

We use the @Liang2013 REE-in-two-pyroxene thermometer to estimate the
equilibration temperature of the samples using an independent system. The
relative immobility of REEs allows assessment of equilibrium temperatures over
longer timescales than those queried with two-pyroxene cation exchange
thermometry.

Rare-earth abundances are compiled for SIMS measurements of
pyroxene phases in contact (2--3 pairs) for each xenolith sample.
A two-pyroxene equilibrium is calculated for each REE and Y, and is shown in
@fig:ree_temperatures|a. A robust regression with a Tukey biweight norm is used
to find the equilibrium temperature for each sample. Significant outliers from
the fit are excluded from thermometry and are discussed below.
Measured temperatures are between ~950 and 1100 ºC for the sample set
[@tbl:thermometry] and broadly correspond to TA98 temperatures for each sample
\[@fig:ree_temperatures|b and @fig:temp_summary\], although some differences may
be diagnostic of preserved fossil heating events.

<!--[[[fig:ree_temperatures]]]-->

### Pyroxene rare-earth disequilibrium

CK-3 shows misfit in La, while CK-5 and CK-7 have disequilibrium in several
LREEs. Sample CK-4 shows major disequilibrium in the light and medium REEs,
with only elements heavier than Ho retaining a linear relationship.

The pattern of disequilibrium in sample CK-4 could force assimilation of
REEs into orthopyroxene, effectively raising the LREE mineral-melt partition
coefficient $D^\mathrm{opx/cpx}$ relative to HREEs. The shape of
this disequilibrium may be due to the parabolic nature of the partition curves
for both pyroxene phases, which are incompletely modeled by
a linear relationship when offset [@Blundy2003; @Sun2012]. The
incorporation of more LREEs into orthopyroxene due to low clinopyroxene modes
[@fig:trace_elements] could also magnify any miscalibration of the thermometer.
Regardless, since measured LREEs are consistently enriched, with low errors
for both orthopyroxene and clinopyroxene, we conclude that anomalies in LREE
temperature do not signal disequilibrium compositions.

All samples except CK-6 and CK-7 show results off the linear trendline for Eu.
This disequilibrium, discussed in @Sun2012, is dependent on the oxygen
fugacity (and \ce{Eu^{2+}}/\ce{Eu^{3+}} ratio) of the host magma. In normal
magmas, this pattern could also arise from the effect of "ghost" plagioclase,
which can create local Eu enrichments and depletions in the neighborhood
of resorbed plagioclase grains. This would suggest that the xenoliths
originated in the shallow mantle lithosphere and were transported deeper,
causing plagioclase breakdown. Discerning between these scenarios is difficult
due to low Eu counts measured by ion microprobe.

General LREE disequilibrium between pyroxenes can be explained by a
fossil heating event that was retained only in REEs due
to their slow diffusion rates. This must have happened prior to subsolidus
major-element re-equilibration, and is thus unrelated to the Crystal Knob
eruption. Two-pyroxene REE disequilibrium suggests possible
focused heating of sample CK-4, poorly understood equilibrium partition
coefficients (for instance, due to reducing mantle conditions), and incomplete
linearizing assumptions in the @Liang2013 thermometer. Untangling these effects
is beyond the scope of this work but presents several opportunities for further
study.

### Comparison with major-element thermometry {#sec:temperature-significance}

Rare-earth exchange thermometry confirms the temperature groupings found by
major-element thermometry [@fig:temp_summary]. REE temperatures of 950-970 ºC
for the low-temperature cohort are most comparable to TA98. For these samples,
the TA98 and REE temperatures together record long-term equilibrium with no
significant thermal perturbations. In the high-temperature cohort, samples CK-4
and CK-6 record REE temperatures significantly higher than TA98 (~1080 ºC vs.
~1040 ºC). CK-3 records a lower temperature in line with major-element
thermometry. Trivalent REEs in pyroxene diffuse several orders of
magnitude slower than bivalent major elements [@Liang2013], so high-temperature
events can set the distribution of REEs despite subsequent major-element
re-equilibration at lower temperature. Excess heating recorded by REE
thermometry for CK-4 and CK-6 and not reflected in major-element temperatures
is likely due to a fossil heating event primarily affecting the deepest
samples.

<!--[[[tbl:temp_summary]]]-->

CK-4 may have experienced a unique transient heating event, with individual
LREE cations recording high temperatures (>1200 ºC)
in disequilibrium with the ~1070 ºC HREE temperature [@fig:ree_temperatures|a].
This event could result from metasomatic processes, which possibly correspond
to the melt-infiltration textures (intergranular melt channels) unique to this
sample [@fig:textures].

