# Thermal structure of the mantle lithosphere beneth the Coast Ranges

## Extrapolation from surface heat flow {#sec:heat-flow}

Previous studies have used surface heat flows to estimate the thermal structure
and evolution of the mantle lithosphere beneath the central California coast
ranges. @Blackwell2004 compiled a heat flow database across the western U.S.
based on borehole measurements in wells > 100 m deep. A "Coast Range Thermal
Anomaly" of high surface heat flux (70-90 mW/m^2) spans the entire Coast Range
belt, both inboard and outboard of the San Andreas fault zone. These heat flows
are similar to the Mojave province but much higher than in the adjacent Central
Valley and Sierra Nevada (20-40 mW/m^2). Coast Range heat flows are high in the
global distribution of regionally averaged continental heat flows, which ranges
from lows of 20 mW/m^2 in cratonic cores to 120 mW/m^2 in focused areas of
active mantle upwelling (e.g. the southern Salton Trough) [@Pollack1977;
@Erkan2009].

Processes such as shear heating, fluid circulation along faults, and rapid
surface uplift have been proposed to account for high surface heat flows in the
Coast Ranges [@Erkan2009]. Highly radiogenic Salinian granodiorites and
tonalites near the surface [@Brady2006] may produce excess heat relative to
typical crustal materials. Also, increased rock uplift and erosion, such as
that documented since 2 Ma in the Santa Lucia Range [@Ducea2003b], could
significantly raise the crustal geothermal gradient through advection of
material. The eruption of Crystal Knob and other volcanic edifices (e.g. Coyote
Lake, @fig:context) demonstrate that a fully conductive geotherm is
unreasonable, as events like these advected at least *some* heat to the surface
since the Pleistocene.

At regional scale, thermal conductivity can be enhanced by hydrothermal
circulation in the presence of fractures. The crust of the Mojave province and
central Coast Ranges was extensively modified by detachment faulting during the
late Cretaceous [@Wood1997; @Chapman2012]. This pervasive fracturing may have
made the crust permeable to fluid transport and heat advection, leading to high
surface heat flows. In contrast, the intact batholithic crust underlying the
Sierra Nevada, Central Valley, and Peninsular Ranges have relatively low heat
flows. Although high heat flows cannot be generated by conductive fault
heating alone [@Lachenbruch1980], the Neogene San Andreas transform system
further fractured the crust in the Coast Ranges, forming new conduits for fluid
advection. @Kennedy1997 shows the presence of mantle fluids in the San Andreas
fault zone, suggesting that deep fluid transport along fracture networks may
contribute to anomalously high surface heat flow in the Coast Ranges.

Together, these factors suggest that conductive geotherms anchored by surface
heat flows represent a maximum limit on geothermal gradients in the mantle
lithosphere. Speculatively, 70-90 mW/m^2 surface heat flows in the Coast Ranges
may correspond to conductive components of ~60-80 mW/m^2 that more accurately
model the deep lithospheric geotherm.

## Depth constraints from Crystal Knob xenoliths

<!--[[[fig:depth]]]-->

The depth of the xenolith samples in the mantle lithosphere, coupled
with equilibration temperatures, provides a fully-defined constraint on the
geotherm beneath Crystal Knob at the time of eruption. Pyroxene-exchange
geothermometry shows that the peridotite samples form two temperature groups
with centroids separated by roughly 60ºC. This temperature range likely
corresponds to an array of sample sources along a depth gradient. For spinel
peridotites, equilibration depths can only be analytically estimated within
broad boundaries. With no reliable geobarometers for spinel peridotites,
several less robust metrics are used to evaluate the depth of the xenolith
source. We present several lines of reasoning suggesting that the samples were
entrained from relatively deep in the spinel stability field (~45-75 km).

Several of the techniques below produce estimates of pressure, rather than
depth. We convert these to depths using a hydrostatic gradient of ~0.03 GPa/km,
integrating crust and mantle densities given in @tbl:model_parameters.

### Limits of spinel stability

Entrainment depths of all peridotite xenoliths must be greater than ~30 km,
the depth of the Moho near the Crystal Knob eruption site [@Trehu1991], which
will be discussed in more detail in @sec:tectonic_scenarios. The
plagioclase--spinel peridotite facies transition (typically at 20-30 km) is
another minimum depth constraint, but it is highly composition-dependent
[@Green1970a], with high-Cr harzburgites stable to the surface [@Borghini2009].

The high-pressure boundary of spinel stability limits maximum possible
entrainment depths.
The spinel--garnet peridotite facies transition is
composition-dependent and poorly constrained for
natural systems, but thought to lie over the 50-80 km depth interval
[@ONeill1981; @Kinzler1997; @Gasparik2000; @Klemme2004].
The breakdown depth of spinel is strongly dependent on temperature and composition, particularly
the amount of refractory Cr hosted by spinel.
Several experimental and thermodynamic studies have estimated the
magnitude of this effect. @ONeill1981 presented experiments both with and
without Cr and described a simple empirical relationship of spinel-out depth
with Cr content and temperature. @Robinson1998 suggests that, given fertile
"pyrolite" compositions with little Cr, garnet is unstable at depths less than
80 km at the peridotite solidus (~1470ºC at this depth). Subsolidus
experimental results show that the maximum depth of the spinel stability field
in the absence of Cr ranges from 1.8-2.0 GPa (55-60 km) at 1000-1200ºC
[@Klemme2000]. Chromian spinels are stable to much greater depth: thermodynamic
modeling by @Klemme2004 suggests a broad garnet-spinel co-stability field (up
to a spinel-out reaction at 5 GPa for Cr# of ~30), but a spinel-weighted
metastable assemblage is possible even at higher pressures.

Samples in the high-temperature cohort (CK-3, CK-4, and CK-6) have high spinel
Cr# due to their history of depletion by partial melting
[@fig:major_elements|c]. This enrichment in refractory Cr expands the stability
field of spinel against garnet to deeper depths. Though @Robinson1998,
@Klemme2000, and @Klemme2004 show a high-pressure phase transition with
a complex compositional dependence, the rough estimate of the garnet-in
pressure given by @ONeill1981 performs sufficiently well at T < 1200 ºC. This
empirical relationship is used in @fig:depth to graphically illustrate the
predicted depth of the spinel-garnet phase-transition based on the Cr# of each
sample. This simple treatment provides a high-pressure constraint on the
Crystal Knob xenolith source. The maximum possible entrainment depth of the
highest-Cr residual samples is ~80 km, versus ~65 km for the low-Cr samples.

### Ca-in-olivine barometer

Equilibration pressure measurements are attempted for the peridotite
xenoliths using the @Kohler1990 Ca-in-olivine
barometer, which is based on the decreasing abundance of Ca
in olivine with pressure. This barometer is explicitly calibrated for spinel
peridotites but should be treated with caution based on poor resolution,
high temperature dependence, vulnerability to late-stage diffusion, and dependence on low Ca concentrations in olivine near analytical thresholds for
electron microprobe analysis [@Medaris1999; @OReilly1997].

Within each sample, pressures are calculated separately for nearest-neighbor
pyroxene and olivine measurements, and analytical errors are propagated through
the calculation. Measured olivine Ca concentrations of ~200-400 ppm are
scattered within each sample but separable [@fig:ca_in_olivine]. To correct for
the mild pressure dependence of the two-pyroxene thermometer and coupled
temperature dependence of the olivine barometer, we jointly solve temperature
and pressure by iterative optimization. This yields internally consistent depth
and temperature measurements for each set of microprobe shots. For each
measurement, Monte Carlo random sampling ($n=100,000$) explores the sensitivity
of the pressure estimate to analytical errors. The density of the resulting
error space for each sample is contoured in @fig:depth.

<!--[[[fig:ca_in_olivine]]]-->

The Ca-in-olivine barometer yields a broad distribution in model depths, with
modes between 40 and 53 km, largely coincident with the spinel
stability field [@fig:depth]. Within the Crystal Knob sample set, the low and
high-temperature cohorts remain separable, with high-temperature samples
showing deeper equilibrium depths. The scale of errors within a single sample
reflects the barometer's strong covariance with major-element thermometers, as
well as its sensitivity to small variations in Ca concentrations. The bulk of
the spread in the data reflects the poor calibration of the barometer itself:
the low-temperature samples in particular have significant scatter towards
depths above the spinel-in isograd. The large Ca cation diffuses rapidly during
transient heating [@Kohler1990], producing a shallowing bias on the depth
distribution. This may explain why CK-4, which apparently experienced a unique
transient heating event, has a depth mode ~10 km shallower than the other
samples (CK-3 and CK-6) despite similar equilibration temperatures. Likewise,
higher REE temperatures for samples CK-4 and CK-6 in the high-temperature
cohort may indicate a slightly deeper source for these samples. Despite the
imprecision of the method, Ca-in-olivine barometry suggests that the samples
were sourced from >40 km, relatively deep within the spinel stability field.

### Comparisons with steady-state heat flow

Estimates of xenolith depth can be constructed by pinning the equilibrium
temperatures of the Crystal Knob samples to a conductive geotherm constrained
by surface heat flux. On @fig:depth, we show a range of geothermal gradients
corresponding to surface heat fluxes of 60-120 mW/m^2. These are calculated
using values for thermal conductivity and diffusivity given in
@tbl:model_parameters for the crust to a depth of 30 km, and mantle lithosphere
below this level. No fixed amount of radiogenic heat production is assumed, but
the average empirical factor of 0.6 proposed by @Pollack1977 is used to reduce
surface heat flux to a presumed mantle contribution, with the remainder being
taken up by radiogenic heat production near the surface. We use a radiogenic
contribution that exponentially decreases with depth with a characteristic
length scale of 10 km. Mantle heat flux and lithospheric thermal conductivity
are the main controls on the slope of the modeled geothermal gradient. This
methodology is developed in @Turcotte2002 and is identical to that used by
@Luffi2009, except that crustal thermal conductivity is reduced to match the
conditions used in dynamic thermal modeling [@sec:modeling]. This yields
a slightly "hotter" geotherm throughout the mantle lithosphere.

Projection of the TA98 temperature distribution onto our calculated
steady-state geotherms suggests that phase stability constraints on the Crystal
Knob xenoliths correspond to a broad range of plausible lithospheric conductive
geotherms. Geotherms placing the Crystal Knob sample set within the spinel
stability field range from ~65-120 mW/m^2 at the surface, accounting for the
Cr-dependent depth of the spinel--garnet transition. The Ca-in-olivine model
depth distributions broadly correspond to surface heat flows ranging from ~70
to 110 mW/m^2. Estimates of surface heat flows of 80-90 mW/m^2 for the central
California coast [@Erkan2009] suggest depths of ~45-55 km for the Crystal Knob
sample set. These depths fall within the spinel stability field and near the
center of the depth distributions extracted using Ca-in-olivine barometry.

## Discussion of xenolith geothermal constraints

Multiple techniques yield broad, overlapping boundaries on the depth of origin
of the Crystal Knob xenoliths.  These depths must be greater than
30 km, the depth to the Moho, and less than 60-90 km based on the
composition-dependent lower boundary of the spinel stability field.
Ca-in-olivine barometry suggests tighter constraints near the center of the
spinel stability field.

For reasonable slopes of the geotherm beneath the Coast Ranges, the
temperatures recorded by Crystal Knob suggest entrainment over a depth range of
5-10 km within the mantle lithosphere, with the hotter samples sourced from
deeper depths. This structure of the dataset is confirmed by Ca-in olivine
barometry. Model depths of 45-55 km from steady-state geotherms agree with
xenolith thermobarometry, but might be underestimates due to potential
non-conductive heat transfer through the crust [@sec:heat-flow]. Given the
bias of both Ca-in-olivine and heat-flow measurements towards shallower depths,
we suggest the depth range of 45-75 km as the likely entrainment depth for the
Crystal Knob xenoliths, corresponding to ~65-90 mW/m^2 conductive geotherms.

This assessment of relatively deep entrainment of the Crystal Knob xenoliths
along a fairly "cool" lithospheric geotherm conforms to constraints from
independent studies. Estimates of the thermal state of the deep lithosphere
derived from seismic tomography show temperatures of 700--1100ºC occurring at
depths of 50--100 km for coastal California [@Goes2002], corresponding to
cooler geotherms than predicted by surface heat flow alone. More recent
estimates put the depth of the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary at roughly 70
km in the southern Coast Ranges [@Li2007]. Given estimates that the
subcontinental lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary occurs at 1200-1300ºC [e.g.
@OReilly2010; @Fischer2010], this corresponds to steady-state geotherms of
70-80 mW/m^2.

## Geochemical variation with depth and temperature {#sec:PT-geochemical-variation}

The Crystal Knob peridotite xenoliths vary in composition with temperature,
with two separable cohorts that sample mantle material with somewhat different
major- and trace-element characteristics.  Major-element and REE
depletion track together and generally increase with the equilibration
temperature of the sample, with the notable exception of sample CK-6. These
differences in temperature are implicitly linked to a gradient in entrainment
depth.

The low-temperature and shallower cohort includes phases
with relatively fertile compositions in both major and trace elements.
The samples have phase compositions similar to depleted MORB
mantle [@Workman2005], and clinopyroxene trace elements
range from essentially undepleted to low levels of depletion
characteristic of the least-depleted abyssal peridotites
[@fig:trace_elements].

The higher-temperature, deeper samples CK-3 and CK-4 contain phases with high
Mg\#s, which suggests that all phases lost incompatible elements during
high-degree depletion. These features, along with high levels of REE depletion,
extremely low clinopyroxene modes, and chromian spinels, indicate significant
melt extraction. Distinct enrichments in LREE likely correspond to
assimilation of a fractionated melt, though this is modeled to be
volumetrically insignificant.

Sample CK-6, the hottest and deepest sample, has a highly enriched
major-element composition, and is only moderately depleted in HREEs. However,
high modal abundance of pyroxenes and spinel, and simultaneously elevated Cr,
Al, and LREE suggest both significant depletion and re-enrichment. This is
bolstered by petrographic evidence of substantial intergrowth and aggregation
of pyroxene grains, unique in the sample set. Elevated REE-in-two-pyroxene
temperatures for samples CK-4 and CK-6 suggest a fossil heating event not shown
in major-element thermometry. This event may have been more completely felt by
sample CK-6, which has a fully equilibrated REE temperature measurement
[@fig:ree_temperatures] and appears to have assimilated a sizable amount of
enriched material.

The pattern of increasing depletion with depth suggests increased melt
extraction deeper in the lithospheric column, at odds with the decrease in
melting degrees with depth expected for decompression melting. Also, the
geochemical variation between undepleted and depleted/re-enriched samples
within a <10 km depth range suggests potential lateral heterogeneity to
melting. @Luffi2009 found a similar inverted pattern within mantle lithosphere
packages beneath Dish Hill, ascribing fertile lherzolites at the top of the
package to refertilization of suboceanic mantle lithosphere. With the exception
of sample CK-6, refertilization of the Crystal Knob samples over all REE is
unlikely due to consistent phase abundances, major- and trace-element
chemistry.

The low-temperature samples are petrologically similar to abyssal peridotites
\[@fig:modes and -@fig:trace_elements\], suggesting an origin as fertile to
moderately depleted suboceanic mantle lithosphere. The depleted harzburgites
CK-3 and CK-4 could be tectonically juxtaposed to deeper levels by duplexing
[as in @Luffi2009] or depleted after emplacement by deeply-sourced melting.
Along these lines, the obvious refertilization of CK-6 at the base of the
column shows melt-rock interactions that were most intense at deep levels. This
spatial pattern of melt generation is commonly associated with flux melting
in subarc settings [e.g. @Jean2010] but could also arise from intense heating
from below [@Thorkelson2005]. In this context, the depletion of the deeper
samples at Crystal Knob would correspond to melt generation deep within the
mantle lithosphere.

