### Depth constraints

<!--[[depth]]-->

Peridotite barometers are based on the decreasing Al content of
orthopyroxene with depth [@Nickel1985; @Brey1990; @Nimis2000]. However, in
the absence of garnet, the reaction is purely thermometric, with nearly
vertical isopleths in P-T space [@Herzberg1978; @Gasparik2000]. With no
reliable geobarometers for spinel peridotites, several less robust
measures are used to evaluate the depth of the xenolith source.

Minimum entrainment depths must be greater than ~30 km, the depth of both the
Moho near the eruption site [@Trehu1991] and the plagioclase-spinel
peridotite facies transition
[@Green1970a]. The xenolith entrainment depth must exceed the boundary of spinel stability,
which is composition-dependent and poorly constrained for natural systems,
but thought to lie over the 50-80 km depth interval
[@ONeill1981; @Kinzler1997; @Gasparik2000; @Klemme2004].

<!--[[ree_temperatures]]-->

Projection of TA98 temperatures onto a geotherm using a surface heat
flux [@Turcotte2002] of 90 mW/m^2, corresponding to measured heat flows
in the study region [@Erkan2009] yields model depths ranging from 31-39
km `[Figure depth]`. However, the surface temperatures that the heat flow
data are based on may be transient.
<!-- could go into things here but may get into this later -->


The Coast Ranges are geologically active and may be affected by
geothermal and erosional processes. Recent increases in erosion such as
those documented post 2 Ma in the Santa Lucia Range [@Ducea2003b]
could significantly raise the geothermal gradient in the Coast Ranges.
Over longer timescales, the inward stepping of the transverse plate
boundary to the San Andreas fault zone has generated significant
shortening and uplift in the Coast Ranges since the Miocene
[@Dickinson2005].

The geothermal gradient may be affected by regional differences in
thermal conductivity, which can be enhanced by hydrothermal circulation
in the presence of fractures.
@Lachenbruch1980 concluded that CRTA could not be generated by
conductive fault heating alone, but was also hesitant to invoke fluid
flow to explain a regionally averaged thermal gradient.
@Kennedy1997 shows the presence of mantle fluids in the San Andreas
fault zone, giving credence to the idea deep fluid transport.

All of these potential estimation effects for a geothermal gradient have
the effect of making it look more pronounced than it really is. Thus, it
seems likely that the gradients shown are a maximum limit on allowed
geothermal gradient.

<!-- This text in the parens is confusing, and needs to be more clearly written with some specific point in mind)) -->

Equilibration pressure measurements are attempted for the peridotite
xenoliths using the @Kohler1990 Ca-in-olivine
barometer. This barometer is explicitly calibrated for spinel
peridotites but widely disregarded based on poor resolution,
vulnerability to late-stage diffusion, and dependence on low Ca
concentrations in olivine [@Medaris1999; @OReilly1997].
This technique yields a broad distribution in model depths,
largely coincident with the spinel stability field `[Figure depth]`.
The low-temperature samples in particular have significant scatter
towards model depth below the spinel-in isograd.
The depth distributions are largely normal, with modes
ranging from 35 to 52 km.
The low and high-temperature cohorts remain separable, with high-temperature
samples generally showing deeper equilibrium depths.

To convert between depth and pressure, we assume a constant geobaric
gradient of 30 km/GPa is used.

<!-- This paragraph needs more -->
The Cr\# of the hotter samples expands the stability field of
spinel against garnet to deeper depths. Several studies have attempted to estimate
the magnitude of this effect [@Klemme2000; @Klemme2004; @ONeill1981].
`Figure depth` shows the depth increases estimated by the
simplified method given in  @ONeill1981, showing that potential depths increase by up to
10 km. If these deeper depths are valid, the outlined
geotherm conforms generally to temperature bounds of 700--1100ºC
measured by seismic tomography at 50--100 km depth for coastal
California [@Goes2002].
<!-- This paragraph is confusing. It needs more explanation, and closer
ties to what is shown on Figure 14. Also the Fig. 14 caption needs more,
including references for the 100, 95 and 90 geotherms) -->
