### Steady-state geotherms

One potential way to estimate entrainment depths for xenolith samples is to pin
them to a steady-state conductive geotherm constrained by surface heat flux. In
@fig:depth, we show steady-state geotherms for surface heat fluxes ranging from
60 to 120 mW/m^2, all of which intersect the potential depth distributions from
spinel stability and Ca-in-olivine barometry.

These geothermal gradients are calculated using thermal conductivity and
diffusivity given in @tab:model_parameters for the crust, to a depth of
30 km, and mantle lithosphere below this level.
No fixed amount of radiogenic heat production is assumed, but the average empirical
factor of 0.6 proposed by @Pollack1977 is used to
reduce surface heat flux to a presumed mantle contribution, with
the remainder being taken up by radiogenic heat production near the surface.
We use an
exponentially decreasing radiogenic contribution with depth
with a characteristic length scale of 10 km.
The amount of heat emanating from the mantle and the presumed thermal conductivity
across the lithosphere are the main
controls on the slope of the modeled geothermal
gradient. This methodology is developed in @Turcotte2002 and is
identical to that used by @Luffi2009, except that crustal
thermal conductivity is reduced to match our
constraints for modeling [@sec:modeling],
leading to a slightly higher geothermal gradient in the mantle
lithosphere.

Using a database of surface heat flows for North America
[@Blackwell2004], @Erkan2009 estimates regionally-averaged heat flows of 80-90 mW/m^2 for the
central California coast, including the vicinity of Crystal Knob. Based on projection of
the TA98 temperature distribution onto our calculated steady-state geotherms,
this corresponds to model depths of ~45-55 km for the Crystal Knob sample set.
This depth range is within the spinel stability field and falls near the center
of the depths extracted using Ca-in-olivine barometry.

However, the extent to which these surface heat flows are representative of the
true integrated geotherm over the entire lithospheric column is unclear.
Extrapolations of the lithosphere-averaged geotherm
from surface heat flow estimates likely produce minimum estimates of sample depth.
Accounting for the Cr-dependent
depth of the spinel--garnet transition, the 65 mW/m^2 geothermal gradient is
the coolest conductive geotherm that places all samples within the spinel
stability field.

In summary, the integration of depth constraints on the xenolith samples from multiple
sources gives a broad range of 

### Regional constraints



Detailed studies of heat flow of the western U.S. [@Erkan2008; @Erkan2009]
based on borehole measurements of heat flux in wells > 100 m deep
show high (60-90 mW/m2) heat flow measurements in the entire Coast Range belt.
These workers assign the central California coast within the "Coast Range Thermal Anomaly"
(CRTA) of high surface heat flux measurements. This CRTA is characterized by
.
In the maps of heat flow presented in @Erkan2008 and @Erkan2009,
the heat flow values in the coast ranges starkly contrast
with low heat flows observed in the adjacent Great Valley,
and in the Sierra Nevada. However, these values are relatively
similar to those measured in the Mojave province.


These regional heat flow
measurements are likely to be maximum estimates of the regionally-averaged heat
flow and geothermal gradient due to several factors including the possibility
of localized uplift, highly radiogenic crust near the surface (e.g. the
Salinian granodiorites and tonalites), and regional heat diffusion by fluid
circulation within the San Andreas fault zone.

, areas
underlain by intact batholithic exposures have relatively
low heat flow values (e.g. the Sierra Nevada and Central Valley,
the Peninsular Ranges, and the Santa Lucia range)

Measurements of surface heat flux for coastal California

- Can we estimate depth from these heat flow data?
- Can we estimate thermal relaxation based on the heat flow data?
  - @Erkan2008 attempts to differentiate between a stalled slab
    and slab window scenario

### Potential for thermal disequilibrium

A key problem in estimating
geothermal gradients from the surface heat flux is understanding the
physical properties that govern the mantle lithosphere material.

However, the surface temperatures that the heat flow
data are based on may be transient.

Regionally averaged continental surface heat flows typically range from
lows of 20 mW/m2 in cratonic cores to 120 mW/m2 in focused areas of
active mantle upwelling (e.g. the southern Salton Trough)
[@Pollack1977; @Erkan2009].

### Thermal modeling

<!-- could go into things here but may get into this later -->

### Heat flow data

The Coast Ranges are geologically active and may be affected by
geothermal and erosional processes. Recent increases in erosion such as
those documented post 2 Ma in the Santa Lucia Range [@Ducea2003b]
could significantly raise the geothermal gradient in the Coast Ranges.
Over longer timescales, the inward stepping of the transverse plate
boundary to the San Andreas fault zone has generated significant
shortening and uplift in the Coast Ranges since the Miocene
[@Dickinson2005].

The geothermal gradient may be affected by regional differences in
thermal conductivity, which can be enhanced by hydrothermal circulation
in the presence of fractures.
@Lachenbruch1980 concluded that CRTA could not be generated by
conductive fault heating alone, but was also hesitant to invoke fluid
flow to explain a regionally averaged thermal gradient.
@Kennedy1997 shows the presence of mantle fluids in the San Andreas
fault zone, giving credence to the idea deep fluid transport.

All of these potential estimation effects for a geothermal gradient have
the effect of making it look more pronounced than it really is. Thus, it
seems likely that the gradients shown are a maximum limit on allowed
geothermal gradient.

<!-- (somewhere near the beginning of this section we need a very explicit
statement of what the heat flow data are, what the anomalies are, what
is CRTA, and how these data have been interpreted-remember, very few of
our readers will be familiar with these data, and potentially our most
critical reviewers will be very familiar with these data, and their
current interpretation. Here is a comment on Erkan and Blackwell that we
should incorporate into our qualitative analysis, I leave it to you to
fit it into this section in your logical progression, and wording: -->

They corner themselves into needing special circumstances to explain
CRTA like rapid recent uplift (which could be a contributing
factor @Ducea2003), shear heating or thermal
relaxation of stalled slab nonsense, just because they insist on the low
heat flow from the Great Valley-Sierra Nevada to be caused by a stalled
slab-classic circular reasoning. We need to go on the offensive here.
Thermal relaxation of a young stalled slab would not be much
different than a deep slab window. Low heat flow values under the entire
GV-SN are irrespective of where plate reconstructions show slab windows
or (Monterey) microplates, but map out very close to the distribution of
where Mesozoic mantle wedge/continental mantle lithosphere is still
intact beneath the crust. Compare E & B’s figure 1 map with the
structure contours that I added to Figure 3 for the Isabella anomaly as
well as the symbolism for the adjacent SE Sierra region that has lost
its mantle lithosphere. The structure contours show just the deeper part
of the anomaly, leaving lots of additional cool Mesozoic mantle
lithosphere beneath the Great valley to axial Sierra Nevada making the
correlation with E & B’s figure 1 pattern tighter. Then we can now layer
on what we know about lithosphere–scale heat production in the Sierra
Nevada from @Brady2006. I also email to you our “Epi II” paper on delamination which
has a helpful section on SN heat flow, right column, pg. 404). Bottom
line is that GV-SN heat flow, except where mantle lithosphere has
delaminated, reflects a relict Late Cretaceous geotherm developed during
extended flat slab subduction at the time or arc cessation. Crystal Knob
and Coyote Lake, in the Coast Ranges clearly show that there IS recent
upwelling under the Coast Ranges, not to mention the Clear Lake volcanic
field. E and B have about every aspect of their interpretation wrong,
but we should be careful and constructive in our criticism of their
work, for their data is very useful.

The eruption of Crystal Knob itself demonstrates that a fully conductive
geotherm is unreasonable, as at least *some* heat was advected to the
surface by this and other volcanic fields.

