## Geochemical variation with depth and temperature {#sec:PT-geochemical-variation}

The Crystal Knob peridotite xenoliths studied here are uniformly isotopically
depleted, with an $\epsilon_\mathrm{Nd}$ of +10.3 to 11.0, and
\ce{^{87}Sr}/\ce{^{86}Sr} of .7023-.7024. These are closely related to values
found in the depleted upper mantle [e.g. @Hofmann1997] and require a mantle
source that has seen no contribution from the western North American
subcontinental mantle or continental lithosphere more generally. The mantle
lithosphere sampled by the Crystal Knob suite matches slightly depleted
convective mantle material and is unrelated to the overlying continental
crust.

Though derived from a single mantle reservoir, the xenolith suite contains
variation in both composition and equilibrium temperature. Integrating depth
constraints derived from geothermal data and Ca-in-olivine geobarometry, we can
note the pattern of xenolith chemistry with depth. The two temperature cohorts
sample mantle material with somewhat different major- and trace-element
characteristics. Major-element and REE depletion track together and generally
increase with the equilibration temperature of the sample, with the notable
exception of sample CK-6.

The low-temperature and shallower cohort includes phases
with relatively fertile compositions in both major and trace elements.
The samples have phase compositions similar to depleted MORB
mantle [@Workman2005], and clinopyroxene trace elements
range from essentially undepleted to low levels of depletion
characteristic of the least-depleted abyssal peridotites
[@fig:trace_elements].

The higher-temperature, deeper samples CK-3 and CK-4 contain phases with high
Mg\#s, which suggests that all phases lost incompatible elements during
high-degree depletion. These features, along with high levels of REE depletion,
extremely low clinopyroxene modes, and chromian spinels, indicate significant
melt extraction. Distinct enrichments in LREE likely correspond to
assimilation of a fractionated melt, though this is modeled to be
volumetrically insignificant.

Sample CK-6, the hottest and deepest sample, has a highly enriched
major-element composition, and is only moderately depleted in HREEs. However,
high modal abundance of pyroxenes and spinel, and simultaneously elevated Cr,
Al, and LREE suggest both significant depletion and re-enrichment. This is
bolstered by petrographic evidence of substantial intergrowth and aggregation
of pyroxene grains, unique in the sample set. Elevated REE-in-two-pyroxene
temperatures for samples CK-4 and CK-6 suggest a fossil heating event not shown
in major-element thermometry. This event may have been more completely felt by
sample CK-6, which has a fully equilibrated REE temperature measurement
[@fig:ree_temperatures] and appears to have assimilated a sizable amount of
enriched material.

Altogether, the pattern of increasing depletion with depth suggests increased
melt extraction deeper in the lithospheric column. However, the strength of the
variation over the <10 km depth range (implied by similar equilibration
temperatures and reasonable geothermal gradients) suggest some heterogeneity to
melting. This pattern is at odds with the monotonically increasing melting
degrees at shallower depths expected for decompression melting. @Luffi2009
found a similar inverted pattern within mantle lithosphere packages beneath
Dish Hill, ascribing fertile lherzolites at the top of the package to
refertilization of suboceanic mantle lithosphere.

Wholesale refertilization seems unlikely for the Crystal Knob sample set due to the consistency of
phase abundances with major and
trace-element chemistry within all samples except CK-6. The
low-temperature samples are petrologically similar to abyssal
peridotites \[@fig:modes and -@fig:trace_elements\], suggesting they could represent un-refertilized
suboceanic mantle lithosphere.
The depleted harzburgites CK-3 and CK-4 could be tectonically juxtaposed
to deeper levels by duplexing [as in @Luffi2009] or depleted after
emplacement. Along these lines, the obviously refertilized CK-6 at
the base of the column shows melt-rock interactions that were most intense at
deep levels.
This spatial pattern is commonly associated with flux melting in subarc settings [e.g. @Jean2010]
but could also arise from intense heating from below [@Thorkelson2005].
We now turn to the tectonic constraints on the structure of the mantle
lithosphere beneath coastal southern California, which provide a
framework in which to consider this deep lithospheric geochemical and thermal
structure.

