# Origin of the mantle lithosphere beneath Crystal Knob

Rb-Sr and Sm-Nd isotopic and trace-element compositions of peridotite xenoliths demonstrate that the mantle lithosphere that was sampled by the
Crystal Knob volcanic neck is sourced from the depleted mantle
[e.g. @Hofmann1997] with no contribution from either recycled crustal material or ancient sub-continental mantle lithosphere The lack of radiogenically enriched arc residues confirms the unrooted nature of Salinia continental arc rocks [e.g. @Hall2013] that lie slivered
above the Franciscan accretionary complex that dominates the regional crustal column.

The Franciscan complex of the region was assembled by sustained subduction of
the Farallon plate during the Cretaceous and early Tertiary
[@Cowan1978; @Saleeby1986; @Seton2012; @Chapman2016a],
and it follows that the mantle
lithosphere of the region may have been constructed from partly subducted
Farallon plate upper mantle late in this Franciscan accretionary history.
Alternatively, another mechanism could have operated following the cessation of
Farallon plate subduction, during the establishment of the San Andreas
transform system. Based on the regional geologic history and constraints from
crustal structure, we identify several viable tectonic scenarios for the
formation of the mantle lithosphere beneath coastal central California, which
we summarize in @sec:slab_window‌-‌-@sec:farallon_nappe.

## Thermal constraints on lithospheric structure and history {#sec:heat-flow}

In this section, we summarize previous efforts to use surface heat flow
to query the deep lithospheric structure of coastal California.
Studies relying on surface heat flow form the basis of attempts to estimate the
thermal structure and evolutionary history of the mantle lithosphere beneath the
central California coast ranges.
@Erkan2008 and @Erkan2009 studied heat flow data across the western U.S.
based on borehole measurements of heat flux in wells > 100 m deep.
These workers found a "Coast Range Thermal Anomaly" of high surface heat flux measurements in a broad swath
across the entire Coast Range belt, both inboard and outboard of the San Andreas fault zone.

Heat flows in the Coast Ranges range from 60-90 mW/m^2. These are much higher than
those observed in the adjacent Central Valley and Sierra Nevada, but are similar
to those measured in the Mojave province.
They are also on the relatively high end of the global range of
regionally averaged continental heat flows, which range from lows of 20 mW/m^2 in
cratonic cores to 120 mW/m^2 in focused areas of active mantle upwelling (e.g.
the southern Salton Trough) [@Pollack1977; @Erkan2009].

Factors such as shear heating, fluid
circulation along faults, and rapid surface uplift have been proposed to
account for high heat flows in the Coast Ranges [@Erkan2009]. However, the extent to which these
surface heat flows are representative of the true integrated geotherm over the
entire lithospheric column is unclear. Evaluating the nature of these constraints
on the actual thermal structure of the lithosphere is critical to understanding
the tectonic history of the Coast Range belt.

Heat flow measurements in the Coast Ranges are likely to
be maximum estimates of the regionally-averaged heat
flow and geothermal gradient due to several factors including
localized uplift, highly radiogenic crust near the surface (e.g.
Salinian granodiorites and tonalites), and regional heat diffusion by fluid
circulation within the San Andreas transform system.
Under any of these scenarios, extrapolations of the lithosphere-averaged geotherm
from surface heat flow estimates likely produce minimum estimates of sample depth.
Recent increases in rock uplift and erosion such as
those documented post 2 Ma in the Santa Lucia Range [@Ducea2003b]
could significantly raise the geothermal gradient in the Coast Ranges.

The geothermal gradient may be affected by regional differences in
thermal conductivity, which can be enhanced by hydrothermal circulation
in the presence of fractures.
@Lachenbruch1980 concluded that high heat flows in the Coast Ranges
could not be generated by
conductive fault heating alone, but were hesitant to invoke fluid
flow to elevate the regionally averaged thermal gradient.
However, areas underlain by an intact batholithic crustal column
(e.g. the Sierra Nevada the Peninsular Ranges) show relatively
low heat flows. This suggests that fluid transport
or localized upwelling along the San Andreas transform system may
contribute significantly to anomalously high surface heat flow in the
Coast Ranges.
@Kennedy1997 shows the presence of mantle fluids in the San Andreas
fault zone, suggesting that deep fluid transport may occur in the region.
The eruption of Crystal Knob itself demonstrates that a fully conductive
geotherm is unreasonable, as at least *some* heat was advected to the
surface by this and other volcanic edifices (e.g. Coyote Lake
[@fig:context]) since the Pleistocene.

In sum, estimates of the geothermal gradient derived from surface heat flow may
overestimate the geothermal gradient at depth, especially in the presence of
fluid flow and radiogenic rocks near the surface. Thus, it seems likely that
the gradients given in @Erkan2009 are a maximum limit on the geothermal
gradient in the mantle lithosphere. Next, we introduce several tectonic
scenarios for the formation of the mantle lithosphere beneath the central
California coastal region and attempt to distinguish between them using thermal
modeling.

