Hi Jason,

I don't consider the temperature gap between the cohorts diagnostic for a
composite mantle section. In the Dish Hill case there's no such T-gap between
the two arrays. If anything, there is a T-gap inside the high-T array of DH
(which I ignored in the 2009 paper, treating it as a simple sampling hiatus).
The DH med-T and high-T arrays have been separated statistically, using ~20-30
samples. Pushing the envelope with only six samples at hand would be a bit
hazardous, I'm afraid. If we'd see the kind of recurrent patterns shown in fig.
11 of our DH paper (T vs. bulk compositions) in the CK suite as well, but
supported by only 3+3 samples, for example, that would look promising, but
still hard to sell as something real. In a best case scenario, we could
suggest, as a side note, that this is similar to DH and, thereby, worth to be
explored in further studies, but it certainly won't cut it as argument in this
paper.  If the six samples would constitute a single, well defined, upwards
enriched series, that would actually sound better (a six-sample correlation
tends to look slightly more convincing than a three-sample correlation): in
this case it would be a bit easier to argue that CK xenos represent a mantle
sliver similar to one of those identified at DH. However, if there's no
T-composition correlation, that does mean anything.

So no, so far I don't smell imbrication in the CK mantle. Which, of course, is
no deal breaker in the Farallon hypothesis and the paper's main message,
because other arguments (e.g. tectonic reconstruction, isotopes) clearly
suggest that if the DH suite is likely to be Farallon, then CK is even more
so.

Best wishes,

Peter

